docs/src/manual/getting_started.md, before:

```@meta
CurrentModule = Copulas
```

# Getting Started

This section gives some general definitions and tools about dependence structures, multivariate random vectors and copulas. Along this journey through the mathematical theory of copulas, we link to the rest of the documentation for more specific and detailed arguments on particular points, or simply to the technical documentation of the actual implementation. 
The interested reader can take a look at the standard books on the subject [joe1997,cherubini2004,nelsen2006,joe2014](@cite) or more recently [mai2017, durante2015a, czado2019,grosser2021](@cite). 

We start here by defining a few concepts about multivariate random vectors, dependence structures and copulas.

## Reminder on multivariate random vectors


Consider a real valued random vector $\bm X = \left(X_1,...,X_d\right): \Omega \to \mathbb R^d$. The random variables $X_1,...,X_d$ are called the marginals of the random vector $\bm X$. 

!!! info "Constructing random variables in Julia via `Distributions.jl`"
    Recall that you can construct random variables in Julia by the following code : 

    ```@example 1
    using Distributions
    X₁ = Normal()       # A standard Gaussian random variable
    X₂ = Gamma(2,3)     # A Gamma random variable
    X₃ = Pareto(1)      # A Pareto random variable with infinite variance.
    X₄ = LogNormal(0,1) # A Lognormal random variable 
    nothing # hide
    ```
    
    We refer to [Distributions.jl's documentation](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Distributions.jl) for more details on what you can do with these objects. We assume here that you are familiar with their API.


The probability distribution of the random vector $\bm X$ can be characterized by its *distribution function* $F$: 
```math
\begin{align*}
  F(\bm x) &= \mathbb P\left(\bm X \le \bm x\right)\\
  &= \mathbb P\left(\forall i \in \{1,...,d\},\; X_i \le x_i\right).
\end{align*}
```
For a function $F$ to be the distribution function of some random vector, it should be $d$-increasing, right-continuous and left-limited. 
For $i \in \{1,...,d\}$, the random variables $X_1,...,X_d$, called the marginals of the random vector, also have distribution functions denoted $F_1,...,F_d$ and defined by : 
```math
F_i(x_i) = F(+\infty,...,+\infty,x_i,+\infty,...,+\infty).
```

Note that the range $\mathrm{Ran}(F)$ of a distribution function $F$, univariate or multivariate, is always contained in $[0,1]$. When the random vector or random variable is absolutely continuous with respect to (w.r.t.) the Lebesgue measure restricted to its domain, the range is exactly $[0,1]$. When the distribution is discrete with $n$ atoms, the range is a finite set of $n+1$ values in $[0,1]$.

## Copulas and Sklar's Theorem

There is a fundamental functional link between the function $F$ and its marginals $F_1,...,F_d$. This link is expressed by the mean of *copulas*. 

!!! definition "Definition (Copula):" 
    A copula, usually denoted $C$, is the distribution function of a random vector with marginals that are all uniform on $[0,1]$, i.e.
    
    $C_i(u) = u\mathbb 1_{u \in [0,1]} \text{ for all }i \in 1,...,d.$


!!! note "Vocabulary"
    In this documentation but more largely in the literature, the term *Copula* refers both to the random vector and its distribution function. Usually, the distinction is clear from context. 

You may define a copula object in Julia by simply calling its constructor: 

```@example 1
using Copulas
d = 4 # The dimension of the model
θ = 7 # Parameter
C = ClaytonCopula(4,7) # A 4-dimensional clayton copula with parameter θ = 7.
```

This object is a random vector, and behaves exactly as you would expect a random vector from `Distributions.jl` to behave: you may sample it with `rand(C,100)`, compute its pdf or cdf with `pdf(C,x)` and `cdf(C,x)`, etc:

```@example 1
u = rand(C,10)
```
```@example 1
cdf(C,u)
```

You can also plot it:

```@example 1
using Plots
plot(C, :logpdf)
```

See [the visualizations page](@ref viz_page) for details on the visualisations tools. It’s often useful to get an intuition by looking at scatter plots.

One of the reasons that makes copulas so useful is the bijective map discovered by Sklar [sklar1959](@cite) in 1959:

!!! theorem "Theorem (Sklar):"
    For every random vector $\bm X$, there exists a copula $C$ such that 

    $\forall \bm x\in \mathbb R^d, F(\bm x) = C(F_{1}(x_{1}),...,F_{d}(x_{d})).$
    The copula $C$ is uniquely determined on $\mathrm{Ran}(F_{1}) \times ... \times \mathrm{Ran}(F_{d})$, where $\mathrm{Ran}(F_i)$ denotes the range of the function $F_i$. In particular, if all marginals are absolutely continuous, $C$ is unique.


This result allows to decompose the distribution of $\bm X$ into several components: the marginal distributions on one side, and the copula on the other side, which governs the dependence structure between the marginals. This object is central in our work, and therefore deserves a moment of attention. 

!!! example "Example (Independence):"
    The function 

    $\Pi : \bm x \mapsto \prod_{i=1}^d x_i = \bm x^{\bm 1}$ is a copula, corresponding to independent random vectors.

The independence copula can be constructed using the [`IndependentCopula(d)`](@ref IndependentCopula) syntax as follows: 

```@example 1
Π = IndependentCopula(d) # A 4-variate independence structure.
nothing # hide
```

We can then leverage the Sklar theorem to construct multivariate random vectors from a copula-marginals specification. This can be used as follows: 

```@example 1
MyDistribution = SklarDist(Π, (X₁,X₂,X₃,X₄))
MyOtherDistribution = SklarDist(C, (X₁,X₂,X₃,X₄))
nothing # hide
```

And the API is still the same: 
```@example 1
rand(MyDistribution,10)
```
```@example 1
rand(MyOtherDistribution,10)
```

Sklar's theorem can be used the other way around (from the marginal space to the unit hypercube): this is, for example, what the [`pseudo()`](@ref Pseudo-observations) function does, computing ranks.

!!! note "Independent random vectors"

    Distributions.jl provides the [`product_distribution`](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/stable/multivariate/#Product-distributions) function to create independent random vectors with given marginals. `product_distribution(args...)` is essentially equivalent to `SklarDist(Π, args)`, but our approach generalizes to other dependence structures and is thus much more powerful. 

Copulas are bounded functions with values in [0,1] since they correspond to probabilities. But their range can be bounded more precisely, and [lux2017](@cite) gives us:

!!! property "Property (Fréchet-Hoeffding bounds):" 
    For all $\bm x \in [0,1]^d$, every copula $C$ satisfies : 

    $$\langle \bm 1, \bm x - 1 + d^{-1}\rangle_{+} \le C(\bm x) \le \min \bm x,$$
    
    where $y_{+} = \max(0,y)$.

The function $M : \bm x \mapsto \min\bm x$, called the upper Fréchet-Hoeffding bound, is a copula. The function $W : \bm x \mapsto \langle \bm 1, \bm x - 1 + d^{-1}\rangle_{+}$, called the lower Fréchet-Hoeffding bound, is on the other hand a copula only when $d=2$. 
These two copulas can be constructed through [`MCopula(d)`](@ref MCopula) and [`WCopula(2)`](@ref WCopula). 

The upper Fréchet-Hoeffding bound corresponds to the case of comonotone random vector: a random vector $\bm X$ is said to be comonotone, i.e., to have copula $M$, when each of its marginals can be written as a non-decreasing transformation of the same random variable (say with $\mathcal U\left([0,1]\right)$ distribution). This is a simple but important dependence structure. See e.g.,[kaas2002,hua2017](@cite) on this particular copula. Note that the implementation of their sampler was straightforward due to their particular shapes:

```@example 1
rand(MCopula(2),10) # sampled values are all equal, this is comonotony
```
```@example 1
u = rand(WCopula(2),10)
sum(u, dims=1) # sum is always equal to one, this is anticomonotony
```

Below we plot independence, a positive dependence (Clayton), and the Fréchet bounds. You can visualize the strong alignment for `M` and the anti-diagonal pattern for `W`.

```@example 1
p1 = plot(IndependentCopula(2), title="IndependentCopula(2)")
p2 = plot(ClaytonCopula(2, 3.0), title="ClaytonCopula(2, 3.0)")
p3 = plot(MCopula(2), title="MCopula(2)")
p4 = plot(WCopula(2), title="WCopula(2)")
plot(p1,p2,p3,p4; layout=(2,2), size=(800,600))
```

Since copulas are distribution functions, like distribution functions of real-valued random variables and random vectors, there exists classical and useful parametric families of copulas (we already saw the Clayton family). You can browse the available families in this package in the bestiary. Like any families of random variables or random vectors, copulas are fittable on empirical data. 

## Fitting copulas and compound distributions.

`Distributions.jl`'s API contains a `fit` function for random vectors and random variables. We propose an implementation of it for copulas and multivariate compound distributions (composed of a copula and some given marginals). Les us first construct a given multivariate random vector: 

```@example 2
using Copulas, Distributions, Random, Plots
# Construct a given model:
X₁, X₂, X₃ = Gamma(2,3), Beta(1,5), LogNormal(0,1)
C = ClaytonCopula(3,0.7) # A 3-variate Clayton Copula with θ = 0.7
D = SklarDist(C,(X₁,X₂,X₃)) # The final distribution
```

And visualize the result: 
```@example 2
plot(D)
```

Now generate data from it, and try to fit it as if it was an unknown dataset: 
```@example 2
simu = rand(D,1000) # Generate a dataset
# You may estimate a copula using the `fit` function:
D̂ = fit(SklarDist{ClaytonCopula,Tuple{Gamma,Beta,LogNormal}}, simu)
```

We see on the output that the parameters were correctly estimated from this sample. More details on the estimator, including, e.g., standard errors, may be obtained with more complicated estimation routines. For a Bayesian approach using  `Turing.jl`, see [this example](@ref Bayesian-inference-with-Turing.jl). Let's vizualize the result: 

```@example 2
plot(D̂)
```

!!! info "The API does not enforce a particular fitting procedures"
    [`Distributions.jl` documentation](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/stable/fit/#Distribution-Fitting) states that: 

    > The fit function will choose a reasonable way to fit the distribution, which, in most cases, is maximum likelihood estimation.

    We embrace this philosophy: from one copula to the other, the fitting method might not be the same. The results of this fitting function should then only be used as "quick-and-dirty" fits, since the fitting method is "hidden" to the user and might even change without breaking releases. More precise controls on this procedures are actively being implemented and will be released soon. 

## Next steps

The documentation of this package aims to combine theoretical information and references to the literature with practical guidance related to our specific implementation. It can be read as a lecture, or used to find the specific feature you need through the search function. We hope you find it useful.

!!! tip "Explore the bestiary!"
    The package contains *many* copula families. Classifying them is essentially impossible, since the class is infinite-dimensional, but the package proposes a few standard classes: elliptical, archimedean, extreme value, empirical...
    
    Each of these classes more or less corresponds to an abstract type in our type hierarchy, and to a section of this documentation. Do not hesitate to explore the bestiary !


```@bibliography
Pages = [@__FILE__]
Canonical = false
```

Commit message:

Move from \bm to \boldsymbol

docs/src/manual/getting_started.md, after:

```@meta
CurrentModule = Copulas
```

# Getting Started

This section gives some general definitions and tools about dependence structures, multivariate random vectors and copulas. Along this journey through the mathematical theory of copulas, we link to the rest of the documentation for more specific and detailed arguments on particular points, or simply to the technical documentation of the actual implementation. 
The interested reader can take a look at the standard books on the subject [joe1997,cherubini2004,nelsen2006,joe2014](@cite) or more recently [mai2017, durante2015a, czado2019,grosser2021](@cite). 

We start here by defining a few concepts about multivariate random vectors, dependence structures and copulas.

## Reminder on multivariate random vectors


Consider a real valued random vector $\boldsymbol X = \left(X_1,...,X_d\right): \Omega \to \mathbb R^d$. The random variables $X_1,...,X_d$ are called the marginals of the random vector $\boldsymbol X$. 

!!! info "Constructing random variables in Julia via `Distributions.jl`"
    Recall that you can construct random variables in Julia by the following code : 

    ```@example 1
    using Distributions
    X₁ = Normal()       # A standard Gaussian random variable
    X₂ = Gamma(2,3)     # A Gamma random variable
    X₃ = Pareto(1)      # A Pareto random variable with infinite variance.
    X₄ = LogNormal(0,1) # A Lognormal random variable 
    nothing # hide
    ```
    
    We refer to [Distributions.jl's documentation](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Distributions.jl) for more details on what you can do with these objects. We assume here that you are familiar with their API.


The probability distribution of the random vector $\boldsymbol X$ can be characterized by its *distribution function* $F$: 
```math
\begin{align*}
  F(\boldsymbol x) &= \mathbb P\left(\boldsymbol X \le \boldsymbol x\right)\\
  &= \mathbb P\left(\forall i \in \{1,...,d\},\; X_i \le x_i\right).
\end{align*}
```
For a function $F$ to be the distribution function of some random vector, it should be $d$-increasing, right-continuous and left-limited. 
For $i \in \{1,...,d\}$, the random variables $X_1,...,X_d$, called the marginals of the random vector, also have distribution functions denoted $F_1,...,F_d$ and defined by : 
```math
F_i(x_i) = F(+\infty,...,+\infty,x_i,+\infty,...,+\infty).
```

Note that the range $\mathrm{Ran}(F)$ of a distribution function $F$, univariate or multivariate, is always contained in $[0,1]$. When the random vector or random variable is absolutely continuous with respect to (w.r.t.) the Lebesgue measure restricted to its domain, the range is exactly $[0,1]$. When the distribution is discrete with $n$ atoms, the range is a finite set of $n+1$ values in $[0,1]$.

## Copulas and Sklar's Theorem

There is a fundamental functional link between the function $F$ and its marginals $F_1,...,F_d$. This link is expressed by the mean of *copulas*. 

!!! definition "Definition (Copula):" 
    A copula, usually denoted $C$, is the distribution function of a random vector with marginals that are all uniform on $[0,1]$, i.e.
    
    $C_i(u) = u\mathbb 1_{u \in [0,1]} \text{ for all }i \in 1,...,d.$


!!! note "Vocabulary"
    In this documentation but more largely in the literature, the term *Copula* refers both to the random vector and its distribution function. Usually, the distinction is clear from context. 

You may define a copula object in Julia by simply calling its constructor: 

```@example 1
using Copulas
d = 4 # The dimension of the model
θ = 7 # Parameter
C = ClaytonCopula(4,7) # A 4-dimensional clayton copula with parameter θ = 7.
```

This object is a random vector, and behaves exactly as you would expect a random vector from `Distributions.jl` to behave: you may sample it with `rand(C,100)`, compute its pdf or cdf with `pdf(C,x)` and `cdf(C,x)`, etc:

```@example 1
u = rand(C,10)
```
```@example 1
cdf(C,u)
```

You can also plot it:

```@example 1
using Plots
plot(C, :logpdf)
```

See [the visualizations page](@ref viz_page) for details on the visualisations tools. It’s often useful to get an intuition by looking at scatter plots.

One of the reasons that makes copulas so useful is the bijective map discovered by Sklar [sklar1959](@cite) in 1959:

!!! theorem "Theorem (Sklar):"
    For every random vector $\boldsymbol X$, there exists a copula $C$ such that 

    $\forall \boldsymbol x\in \mathbb R^d, F(\boldsymbol x) = C(F_{1}(x_{1}),...,F_{d}(x_{d})).$
    The copula $C$ is uniquely determined on $\mathrm{Ran}(F_{1}) \times ... \times \mathrm{Ran}(F_{d})$, where $\mathrm{Ran}(F_i)$ denotes the range of the function $F_i$. In particular, if all marginals are absolutely continuous, $C$ is unique.


This result allows to decompose the distribution of $\boldsymbol X$ into several components: the marginal distributions on one side, and the copula on the other side, which governs the dependence structure between the marginals. This object is central in our work, and therefore deserves a moment of attention. 

!!! example "Example (Independence):"
    The function 

    $\Pi : \boldsymbol x \mapsto \prod_{i=1}^d x_i = \boldsymbol x^{\boldsymbol 1}$ is a copula, corresponding to independent random vectors.

The independence copula can be constructed using the [`IndependentCopula(d)`](@ref IndependentCopula) syntax as follows: 

```@example 1
Π = IndependentCopula(d) # A 4-variate independence structure.
nothing # hide
```

We can then leverage the Sklar theorem to construct multivariate random vectors from a copula-marginals specification. This can be used as follows: 

```@example 1
MyDistribution = SklarDist(Π, (X₁,X₂,X₃,X₄))
MyOtherDistribution = SklarDist(C, (X₁,X₂,X₃,X₄))
nothing # hide
```

And the API is still the same: 
```@example 1
rand(MyDistribution,10)
```
```@example 1
rand(MyOtherDistribution,10)
```

Sklar's theorem can be used the other way around (from the marginal space to the unit hypercube): this is, for example, what the [`pseudo()`](@ref Pseudo-observations) function does, computing ranks.

!!! note "Independent random vectors"

    Distributions.jl provides the [`product_distribution`](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/stable/multivariate/#Product-distributions) function to create independent random vectors with given marginals. `product_distribution(args...)` is essentially equivalent to `SklarDist(Π, args)`, but our approach generalizes to other dependence structures and is thus much more powerful. 

Copulas are bounded functions with values in [0,1] since they correspond to probabilities. But their range can be bounded more precisely, and [lux2017](@cite) gives us:

!!! property "Property (Fréchet-Hoeffding bounds):" 
    For all $\boldsymbol x \in [0,1]^d$, every copula $C$ satisfies : 

    $$\langle \boldsymbol 1, \boldsymbol x - 1 + d^{-1}\rangle_{+} \le C(\boldsymbol x) \le \min \boldsymbol x,$$
    
    where $y_{+} = \max(0,y)$.

The function $M : \boldsymbol x \mapsto \min\boldsymbol x$, called the upper Fréchet-Hoeffding bound, is a copula. The function $W : \boldsymbol x \mapsto \langle \boldsymbol 1, \boldsymbol x - 1 + d^{-1}\rangle_{+}$, called the lower Fréchet-Hoeffding bound, is on the other hand a copula only when $d=2$. 
These two copulas can be constructed through [`MCopula(d)`](@ref MCopula) and [`WCopula(2)`](@ref WCopula). 

The upper Fréchet-Hoeffding bound corresponds to the case of comonotone random vector: a random vector $\boldsymbol X$ is said to be comonotone, i.e., to have copula $M$, when each of its marginals can be written as a non-decreasing transformation of the same random variable (say with $\mathcal U\left([0,1]\right)$ distribution). This is a simple but important dependence structure. See e.g.,[kaas2002,hua2017](@cite) on this particular copula. Note that the implementation of their sampler was straightforward due to their particular shapes:

```@example 1
rand(MCopula(2),10) # sampled values are all equal, this is comonotony
```
```@example 1
u = rand(WCopula(2),10)
sum(u, dims=1) # sum is always equal to one, this is anticomonotony
```

Below we plot independence, a positive dependence (Clayton), and the Fréchet bounds. You can visualize the strong alignment for `M` and the anti-diagonal pattern for `W`.

```@example 1
p1 = plot(IndependentCopula(2), title="IndependentCopula(2)")
p2 = plot(ClaytonCopula(2, 3.0), title="ClaytonCopula(2, 3.0)")
p3 = plot(MCopula(2), title="MCopula(2)")
p4 = plot(WCopula(2), title="WCopula(2)")
plot(p1,p2,p3,p4; layout=(2,2), size=(800,600))
```

Since copulas are distribution functions, like distribution functions of real-valued random variables and random vectors, there exists classical and useful parametric families of copulas (we already saw the Clayton family). You can browse the available families in this package in the bestiary. Like any families of random variables or random vectors, copulas are fittable on empirical data. 

## Fitting copulas and compound distributions.

`Distributions.jl`'s API contains a `fit` function for random vectors and random variables. We propose an implementation of it for copulas and multivariate compound distributions (composed of a copula and some given marginals). Les us first construct a given multivariate random vector: 

```@example 2
using Copulas, Distributions, Random, Plots
# Construct a given model:
X₁, X₂, X₃ = Gamma(2,3), Beta(1,5), LogNormal(0,1)
C = ClaytonCopula(3,0.7) # A 3-variate Clayton Copula with θ = 0.7
D = SklarDist(C,(X₁,X₂,X₃)) # The final distribution
```

And visualize the result: 
```@example 2
plot(D)
```

Now generate data from it, and try to fit it as if it was an unknown dataset: 
```@example 2
simu = rand(D,1000) # Generate a dataset
# You may estimate a copula using the `fit` function:
D̂ = fit(SklarDist{ClaytonCopula,Tuple{Gamma,Beta,LogNormal}}, simu)
```

We see on the output that the parameters were correctly estimated from this sample. More details on the estimator, including, e.g., standard errors, may be obtained with more complicated estimation routines. For a Bayesian approach using  `Turing.jl`, see [this example](@ref Bayesian-inference-with-Turing.jl). Let's vizualize the result: 

```@example 2
plot(D̂)
```

!!! info "The API does not enforce a particular fitting procedures"
    [`Distributions.jl` documentation](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/stable/fit/#Distribution-Fitting) states that: 

    > The fit function will choose a reasonable way to fit the distribution, which, in most cases, is maximum likelihood estimation.

    We embrace this philosophy: from one copula to the other, the fitting method might not be the same. The results of this fitting function should then only be used as "quick-and-dirty" fits, since the fitting method is "hidden" to the user and might even change without breaking releases. More precise controls on this procedures are actively being implemented and will be released soon. 

## Next steps

The documentation of this package aims to combine theoretical information and references to the literature with practical guidance related to our specific implementation. It can be read as a lecture, or used to find the specific feature you need through the search function. We hope you find it useful.

!!! tip "Explore the bestiary!"
    The package contains *many* copula families. Classifying them is essentially impossible, since the class is infinite-dimensional, but the package proposes a few standard classes: elliptical, archimedean, extreme value, empirical...
    
    Each of these classes more or less corresponds to an abstract type in our type hierarchy, and to a section of this documentation. Do not hesitate to explore the bestiary !


```@bibliography
Pages = [@__FILE__]
Canonical = false
```
